Okay. Welcome, everyone. We're now in public session for
our item number eight on our agenda today, which is the
inquiry into Fire and Emergency New Zealand's fleet management
and related issues. And we're now in public session.
We have on our order of
agenda Newtown Fire Station crews. Are they here?
Yes. Can I ask you to come to the table, please?
And 10 minutes with you and introduce
yourself and then if we've got time, we will take questions within that 10
minutes. Thank you.
Chair and members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to speak.
My name is Kurt Walsh. I am the local Wellington NZPFU
secretary. But today I'll be speaking to you as an operational station officer
based out of Newtown Fire Station.
Our submission represents a collective view from experienced operational
firefighters with an average of over 20 years' service.
We're speaking today because we want to see a safer, more
reliable fleet for both firefighters and the public we serve.
The key point we want to make is this.
The issue with fleet management and Fire and Emergency New Zealand are not
isolated or technical. They are systemic.
They reflect an organization that is strong at writing policies and
recommendations, but constantly fail to implement them.
FENZ has clear fleet policies. For example, a
tier one station like Newtown is supposed to have a frontline
Type 3 appliance that should be cascaded every three years to a
quieter station.
Our appliance is currently over nine years old.
This has been a direct cause from the MAE and appliance
cracking issues
that you're already familiar with,
and the delayed timeframe to procure and implement a solution.
Wellington is currently undertaking training on Anglico MAEs
as we speak, and we've already identified a myriad of faults across all of
them.
These appliances are suspected to be a number of years old.
To my knowledge, FENZ is yet to confirm the exact age to the committee.
Across the Wellington region, there are appliances operating up to over
30 years old, well beyond their intended 20-year lifespan.
When an organization does not follow its
own asset replacement policies, it inevitably leads to
compounding risk over time.
This
isn't just about age. Older appliances are less reliable,
more prone to mechanical and electrical failure,
harder to integrate with modern equipment, and often lack current safety
features.
Even more concerning, our relief appliances, the appliances used when our
usual frontline trucks are off the run, are generally the oldest in the fleet.
And more often than not, we cannot fit all of our equipment onto these
appliances due to insufficient locker space.
That directly affects response efficiency and safety.
I have a couple examples that I have personally dealt with and feel are
significant to highlight some of the issues that we face locally.
The now 36-year-old relief appliance, that the pump engagement
was so temperamental it had to be backed up by the next
closest, available appliance to all calls.
It had a potential risk of fire. This same truck
ironically caught fire in the middle of Willis Street due to an electrical fault.
The 23-year-old relief appliance that has had a
well-known air leak for as long as I can remember.
This unresolved fault has subsequently resulted in delayed responses,
including two confirmed fires and time-critical, life-threatening medical
calls.
There have been many cases when this truck has sat in the machine bay,
building up air for minutes before being able to respond.
This weighs heavy on the firefighters.
The fire on the ninth floor of a building under construction on Wakefield Street.
Building fire safety systems disconnected, lifts unavailable,
stairwell compromised, both of Wellington's 32 Type
5 aerials out of action.
Just a 17-meter Type 4 replacement.
The inferior tactics available to the incident controller was for the firefighters
to scale up nine storeys of scaffolding on the exterior of the building,
pull the hose up with rope so they could extinguish the fire.
Another example of operational impact occurs when an appliance is unavailable
and reliance shifts to the network.
In July 2025, Newtown's Type 3 appliance was offline due
to insufficient staffing, a recurring issue in Wellington.
During this time, a confirmed two-story abandoned property fire
occurred less than 40 meters from the Newtown Fire Station.
The building was known to sometimes shelter homeless individuals.
With the Type 3 out of service, resources responded from Wellington City
and Kilbirnie alongside Newtown's heavy aerial, Christine.
This left the two aerial firefighters making tactical decisions outside
standard safe systems of work and FENZ procedures.
They deployed the decrewed Type 3, fire appliance
from Newtown to undertake defensive exposure protection of the neighboring
properties until fully crewed appliances arrived
approximately five minutes later.
It was confirmed hours later that nobody was inside.
Unfortunately, we as firefighters are now too familiar with not dealing with if
an appliance will break down, but the mentally fatiguing
acceptance of when.There have now been
multiple investigations and reviews that all identify similar issues.
They repeatedly recommend improved fault reporting systems, better
training,
completion of the aerial strategy, improved coordination between fleet and
operations. Yet many of these recommendations remain
unimplemented, some for nearly a decade.
This repeated failure to act is one of the most concerning aspects that we are
seeing.
Christine, named after the 1983 John Carpenter film
of a '58 Plymouth Fury that is possessed.
We'd like to highlight one example that illustrates the problem
clearly. Our aerial appliance, locally known as
Christine, has only been in operation for about a third of the time in
the past five and a half years. At one point, it was out of service
for 811 days consecutively after
Christine failed at a house fire in 2022 that resulted in a Level 2
investigation.
During that time, it was replaced with a Type 4 aerial appliance
that had a significantly reduced capability.
It was also the South Island spare, leaving no aerial replacement cover
for the South Island aerial fleet.
We had this replacement appliance for over two years at Newtown.
Christine is only one of two heavy aerial appliances in the Wellington
region.
The prolonged unavailability also reduced tactical operational
options for major instances such as the Lotus Lodge tragedy.
We're not suggesting it would have changed the outcomes of specific events, but it
undeniably reduced capacity.
In the past, referring to the appliance as Christine has caused us some
issues. With the publication of Christine's diary, FENZ considered
it bullying and were worried about legal action, thinking she was a
human.
This is an example of the disconnect between FENZ and the front line.
Despite this,
FENZ has purchased five new heavy aerial appliances without
completing the aerial strategy review that was recommended as urgent
back in the 2017 Level 2 investigation and again in the
2020 ICC operational review.
These new appliances will likely remain in service until around 2050.
So we are effectively locking in decades of decisions based on an outdated and
incomplete strategy. That significantly limits
flexibility for the future.
Another key issue is accountability.
There is a pattern of blaming inherited problems, minimizing or dismissing
operational concerns, and delaying action until issues become
publicly visible. This erodes trust and slows
progress.
We have seen some improvements
in relationships at a local level, but the broader pattern remains.
Training is also a concern. We are still using training material on
appliances that contains known errors.
Fault reporting systems are fragmented, duplicated, and in some cases
have been trialed and then abandoned.
This creates inefficiency and increases the risk of
miscommunication.
In closing, we want to emphasize that this submission was made constructively.
We are not raising these issues to criticize individuals.
We are raising them because we believe that the organization can and must
do better.
We need a shift from policy to implementation, clear
accountability for delivering change, fleet decisions driven by
operational reality, and a system that learns from its mistakes.
Ultimately, improving fleet management is about improving safety
for our crews and for the communities we serve.
We also support a wider inquiry into Fire Emergency New Zealand.
Thank you, and I'm happy to take questions.
Thank you, Kurt. We've got just over a minute. Tim's got a question.
Mike in the moment if we get time.
Thanks, Kurt. Really appreciate that.
I think you've been really clear, particularly on the aerial piece, so I wonder if
I can ask you one question on the Type 3.
One thing I've been interested to note is that the configuration of identical
trucks will change around the country, and I understand some of the reasons for
that. But I was really keen to understand from you,
I'm trying to ask, is there too much sort of
personalization of these trucks that makes it rather than, FENZ come
out and say, "Well, here's 47. They're going to be identical.
It's going to be the same configuration, whether you jump into one in New Plymouth
or Rotorua or Newtown."
Or actually, we want to have these more customizable, but we start to end up with
all FENZ and all sorts.
I think different
areas and communities and districts have different needs, and you need to be
flexible in what equipment you do carry. We can't be too hard set on this.
You just limit yourself for tactical options if you do that, in my
opinion.
Okay.
Thank you. Mike.
Thanks for your submission. And just a question.
So at your station, you have one Type 3 and a Type 5,
which requires six
crew.
Six, yeah.
And you have 26 firefighters there, which is roughly, let's say, six and a half
per shift.
Yeah.
So even if you had the fleet that was
working condition, everything was right, there's still an issue, though, that
they're not manned, cannot be manned all the time because of the
amount of fire apology you have, is it?
Yeah. So I think it's to do with the staffing ratio that hasn't changed for
decades. The Holidays Act changed in 2013, which changes
how much leave. We got stat holidays now.
And so you've got all this leave, and we're away for training and
illnesses and injuries and all sorts of other reasons,
and we struggle to backfill with that change.
Right. Thanks, Kurt. I'm sorry. We did have another, but we've run out of time, so
thank you very much. That was a really useful submission.
Thank you.
All right. And we move to Terence Beard, who is online.
Terence, you've been watching that.
As an individual, we have five minutes with you.
That is inclusive of questions if we have time.
It's your time, so off you go
Okay, kia ora.
So yes, I've previously written, submitted an individual document,
and I just think it's worth noting that
I've been active as a union nominated rep on fleet related
projects and as a subject matter expert since about 2016.
This submission is a sample of some of my experiences during
that time, and I am also the NZPFU
fleet portfolio holder.
So I have a lot of information coming to me about problems from around the country.
However,
I was involved in the Type 3 heavy urban appliance
acquisition since 2018.
I have had user input to this procurement since the
beginning. This procurement has selected a
manufacturer, and new appliances will start to roll
in later this year. It has taken eight
years from start to finish.
In my opinion, this project has been delayed by slow decision-making
at multiple phases by FENZ bureaucracy.
COVID was a factor, but it was by far not the biggest factor over the eight-year
span.
During the project, I contributed alongside many other committed and
dedicated individuals
who brought a range of experience and expertise to the project to
ensure that the appliance would be fit for
purpose. As an evaluator, I would often need to
confirm a decision for the record so that the decision could
escalate to the next level of decision-making.
I was regularly asked to confirm decisions,
and these decisions were usually about specifications,
design,
evaluation decisions, or decisions towards placing an order.
In order to keep the project schedule, it was not unusual to get this type
of request during my rostered days off, which are effectively
my weekend and on occasion, during my annual leave.
Had I not confirmed the decision, it would potentially have caused delay.
And contributors at my level always met the deadline.
The schedule was phased so that each level of sign-off would have time
to make a decision before finally reaching a scheduled board meeting.
And if the project document did not make it to the scheduled board meeting, it
would stall until the next scheduled meeting.
There were no out-of-cycle meetings or decisions made by the board.
FENZ appeared not to be able to make timely decisions across all
departments being consulted.
Any questions from those departments effectively stalled
progress.
The project specialists were experienced, and schedules were realistic
based on their experience outside of FENZ.
Documents would be written for the steering committee
and rewritten on a different template with different content for the
next tier and the next until the document reached the board,
because that is how it is done at FENZ.
It was often months before the decision that I had been at the beginning
of was confirmed.
Suppliers knew that an order or a decision was coming, but they would have to
wait.
I gave an example in my written submission of decisions made in
December '24 and March '25 that
had not been actioned at the time of my submission, and I note
that they have now been signed off on the 23rd of April this year.
That's an incredibly long time.
I also sit as the union rep on the
Type 4 acquisition project steering committee.
The Type 4 is a combination appliance that can operate as a
pump and a small aerial.
They provide value as a resource in that they are a pump on a daily
basis, but they are an aerial resource in
17 locations across the country for the times
that an aerial is needed.
They are most common in large towns and small cities, but they also feature in our
larger cities.
The first of the existing Type 4 appliances are approaching end of
life.
It is likely that all 17 Type 4 appliances will reach end of
life before the replacements arrive.
Many of the Type 4 appliances have been at the same busy location
their whole operational life.
Many Type 4 are worn out and spend significant amount of
time out of commission.
Terrence, there's only 15 seconds left, so if you could sort of
get to wind that up. I'm sorry to interrupt because it's very good,
but
just-
Yeah. Okay. Yeah, I just wanted to say that the last four steering committee
meetings were canceled without explanation.
Okay. Thank you. We don't have time for questions, but thank you very much.
Your submission is incredibly useful, so thank you very much for
that.
Okay.
Great. Thank you.
Thanks, Terry.
Thanks, Terry. Righty-o. Now we have the United Fire Brigades Association
of New Zealand, the Fire Brigades Institute, and the Institution of
Fire Engineers. Welcome, Bill and Scott.
You know the deal. We have 10 minutes with you and closer for questions if
there's time. Over to you.
Yeah.
My name's Bill Buttsbach. I'm the Chief Executive of the
United Fire Brigades Association of New Zealand.
We are a membership association that provides a range of services
to all firefighters in New Zealand,
including professional development, events, conferencing,
financial supportService recognition, very importantly,
and advocacy and support. Now, our members include all firefighters within FENZ and
within industry, the airport fire services, within the military, and more recently
in the Cook Islands.
And while our members include all
firefighters within FENZ, the paid firefighter membership of the
FBA, some 1,800,
are advocated for by their union, the Fire Brigades Union,
in terms of their terms and conditions of employment.
Our key focus is to represent the voice of the 12,000 strong
volunteer workforce that form the backbone of service provision within their
communities, through FENZ.
Scott.
Kia ora. Kia ora koutou katoa. Ko Scott Lennois toku ingoa.
My name is Scott Lennois. I'm here to represent the New
Zealand branch of the Institution of Fire Engineers as the New
Zealand president. So our organization is all about advancing fire
safety, improving fire science, engineering,
and prevention in order for us to help assist to protect property,
people, and the environment.
Thank you. Bill. The FBA, alongside the Fire Brigades Institute and the
IFE, share that common objective of making New Zealand a safer place
from the hazards that we face. And we're partners for that purpose, and we were
very pleased to make this joint submission together.
Look, there's no doubt that there's gaps in some of the fleet capability and
condition within FENZ, but there's a broader issue within FENZ
around their capital program management overall.
Now, I was a member of the senior leadership team of the Fire Service for 14 years,
and this is not a new problem. It's been going on for decades.
And frankly, FENZ is in catch-up mode very much like we were in the old Fire
Service.
There's a continuing problem with the Fire Service.
Sixty-seven percent of the FENZ operation budget is direct personnel
costs and 10% is depreciation. That leaves about 23 cents in
the dollar to do everything else, to do training, to run a fleet,
to run building programs and all the rest.
And FENZ is always going to be chasing that curve unless there's a cash
injection. FENZ has no opportunity to generate more funding like if we were
in a private business. They aren't going to have any more income.
We know that the levy's not providing any more funds, but people can't afford
further insurance. So that's an issue before the government
and FENZ, of course.
This inquiry provides a really positive opportunity
to drive a reset of the FENZ fleet and equipment strategy.
One that's not driven by the old thinking that prevails in the sector.
One that is cost effective and value for money.
To continue with a fleet model that reflects the traditional urban fire service
paradigm of operational needs is flawed and very
expensive. We need to adopt fleet strategy and management practices
that are more reflective of international best practice.
But more important than that, that are more reflective of the operational realities
that face New Zealand today. They are quite different from my day when I started in
1976.
FENZ fleet management must move from a vehicle replacement model to a strategic
emergency capability system, one that is risk-based,
transparent,
personnel informed, life cycle funded, and fit for the
realities of a modern all
hazards emergency service.
This inquiry is not simply about whether FENZ has enough trucks.
It's about whether New Zealand has the right emergency response capability in the
right places at the right time for the risks that
communities now face.
FENZ was created to be more than an old urban fire service,
plus rural fire authorities bolted on.
But parts of the fleet system still appear to reflect legacy thinking.
It does not keep pace with changes to the Building Code, pending changes to the
firefighting water supplies Code of Conduct,
Code of Practice rather, and urban planning.
The opportunity now is to design the fleet around the organization that
Parliament actually created, a national all hazards community
risk-based emergency service.
Fire and Emergency New Zealand is New Zealand's only broad-based emergency service.
Scott.
Thanks, Bill. So Bill touched briefly on the Building Code and
how that's influenced
the environment that we operate in.
The functional requirements set out in that Building Code are very clear that
firefighters need to have the necessary things in place to enable them
to enter and suppress fire in a fire protected bui- fire affected
building, sorry,
and to do that safely, effectively, efficiently, et cetera.
That also includes the vehicles that they're using to get there and
deliver water for their firefighting needs.
So with that in mind, the Building Act takes care of that.
In the open natural environment, the Resource Management
Act has certainly had an effect on firefighting strategies in that space,
particularly in a planning sense, in some case over-planning.
And I'm talking about access to houses to fight fire, the
effect of floor rise building on our building stock,
the integration of
suburban settings within the natural environment around bush clad
environments, et cetera.
Then we throw in things like battery energy storage systems, lithium-ion batteries,
climatic extremes.
The golden thread of fire safety, there's a big impact here in terms of how
we deal with these things and the Building Code to ensure that
firefighters
have the facilities and the necessary skills to deal with those things.
Thanks, Bill.
There's no such thing as a volunteer fire.
There's no such thing as a paid firefighter road crash or a rural only
emergency.
There's only community risk,
and the fleet should be designed around that risk.
We're not saying the whole fleet is broken, because it's not.
No.
The volunteers have never been better off, particularly in the rural spaces.
But the areas of weakness are there.
The relief fleet is in appalling state.
In an ideal world, the relief fleet would be as good as the new
fleetMaintenance arrangements, introduction to service specialist
capability and long-term replacement settings.
And they are serious, these risks, because they affect operational readiness.
So we ask the committee to recommend a formal independent risk-based
review of FENZ fleet design,
allocation, procurement, maintenance, relief capacity, and lifestyle
funding, life cycle funding, with structured input from FENZ
frontline personnel,
the contractor sector, and this is very important because they're part of this as
well. And particular emphasis should be put on talking with the forestry and land
management sector,
because they have a lot to contribute as well.
FENZ should not face this problem alone.
There's an industry out there that supports the fire and emergency sector.
And of course, the professional technical bodies such as the IFE and Fire Brigade
Institute, along with the Institute of Professional Engineers.
So we're available to the committee outside of this forum for additional questions
or for clarification if you require that.
And we thank you for the opportunity to present and share the voice of our
12,000 volunteer members and the professional technical
institutions in the sector. Thank you.
Thanks, Bill. Thanks, Scott. I've got a couple of questions so far.
Lamanga and Andy.
Thanks, Madam Chair. Thank you for your presentation and your written
submission. Very keen to hear, in terms of
what you presented today, and you've just heard the previous submitters,
what would be the priority in terms of capability to move
to in terms of what you've outlined in your report?
Do you want to take the first bit?
Yeah, absolutely. I think it needs to be recognized
that we're expected to do a lot of firefighting tasks,
and that the codes and standards of which we operate to in terms of
best practice or good practice more so,
all take into account some of those types of
situations. But really what we need to do is shift towards a
strategy piece where it's made very clear how we can best deal with
those types of emergencies across the emergency management spectrum,
because there's just so many things that we could be dealing with.
What are the things that we need to be dealing with, and how do we do that well?
And if I can just add, it's about the emerging risks that we face
now. They're the priorities. Most of the calls firefighters attend are medical
emergencies, and then there's wildfire,
and some of the Part 12
responsibilities that are there.
So those to me would be the priorities, but there's no doubt that there's some
shortcomings in the aerial fleet that are being addressed, and we really need
to get those Type 3s rolled out. But I suggest after that, the review would
be useful and have a reset.
Thank you. Andy?
Yeah. Look, you started off by saying FENZ is in catch-up mode,
and need for capital injection, etc.
My question to you really is when you look at the rate at which vehicles are
being replaced, it looks like they're actually not catching up at all.
They look like they're getting further behind.
Can you just give us a little bit of commentary on that?
And also in your written submission, you've said that the current
lifespan setting's
too long.
I don't know whether that's actually with the intended lifespans or the
actual lifespans. But we've also already heard about it's not just the
age of them, it's the condition of them.
You could have something that's older and still good or younger and not good.
But can you just shed some light on those two issues? Are they catching up?
And also just how we
manage that condition of the asset vis-à-vis the lifespan.
Our view is that they won't catch up with the current settings, and if they
continue with the traditional thinking around what the model looks like-
Just getting worse
... it will get worse if they continue with the current settings.
Right.
There's a chance to re-look at this.
At the moment, it's a one size fits all, and there's an opportunity for far more
flexibility that might provide some actual solutions.
Give us an example of what you mean.
Well,
in the major cities, not all of the trucks need to be large pumps.
Large pumps have got their role, particularly if you need to have a water relay for
a major structure fire. But there's room for some
flexibility in terms of the appliances deployed in the metropolitan areas
that could respond to different risks.
Okay. Thank you. We are out of time, but thank you for your
offer to ask more questions if we need to follow up.
So thank you for doing that.
Thank you.
Kia ora. Thanks.
So we now have NZPFU.
Thank you.
You know how it works. We've got 20 minutes with you.
Yep.
But that's a hard stop at the end of 20 minutes.
Absolutely.
Around seeing about question time.
Yes.
Cool, and we do wanna talk to advisors as well before that. So thank you very much.
Over to you.
Thanks. I'm Marty Watson. I'm the National Secretary of New Zealand Professional
Firefighters' Union, and I'm gonna speak today mainly
about the push for a proper
broad punching inquiry into the whole operations of FENZ.
And I've got with me today the National President, Joseph Stanley.
Kia ora.
My name's Joseph Stanley. I'm the National President of the NZPFU.
I'm also a substantive senior station officer in the Christchurch Fire Brigade,
but I currently work as the Manager of Officer Development out of our national
training function. My role every day is to manage the
delivery of training to volunteers and career firefighters as they move through
their officer progression and commanders in Fire and Emergency New
Zealand. So I'm responsible for both volunteer, urban, and rural
firefighter development into officers as well.
I've been a firefighter since 2012.
I'm also an accident investigator through the ICAM model of
accident investigation in Fire and Emergency New Zealand.
I've investigated a number of appliance faults over the time
that I've been with Fire and Emergency New Zealand.
I spent
almost four years in Fire and Emergency New Zealand transition and
integration as we built Fire and Emergency New Zealand out of the ashes of the New
Zealand Fire Service and the National Rural Fire Authority.
So, as the whole point of our submission, I've left the issue of
the actual fire appliances and the procurement, et cetera, to the
firefighters, and the way in which you've received that is through various
locals and firefighters. And I just want to say, you didn't get time to question
Terry today. If there's anything you want from any of those presenters, I'd be more
than happy to- Great. Thank you ... respond.
Terry, in particular, he has a lot of knowledge.
So, our view is this, is that
you can't talk about appliances, aging appliances, and
issues around procurement without talking about funding and expenditure.
And FENZ is in disarray, and we are really,
genuinely alarmed that FENZ is
in real danger of not being able to provide the emergency response that New
Zealand expects and should have.
And current decision-making is moving even further away
from, not from bolstering an emergency response, but from
reducing emergency response. And it's been done under the
guise of not enough money.
FENZ, as you will all know, got a significant boost of more than
350 million to set up FENZ, and then has more than doubled
its funding over its current lifespan.
And we believe that there needs to be an absolute
scrutiny into where that money has gone.
In particular, the state of their fleet is a really
visible and obvious issue, where
it hasn't been directed towards emergency response.
But there's other really critical issues as well, including
staffing. And in 2022,
FENZ worked with the union and agreed
to look at staffing and the appliances. We set up working parties.
That actually went well for about 12 months.
The FENZ
board agreed in principle to 230-odd new firefighters,
additional firefighters to the current levels.
The current levels, both career and volunteer, are around the
1990s levels.
We've now got a situation where FENZ is driving down career
firefighter numbers. In the last couple of years,
in Auckland, the Auckland management arranged for another
relief
roster, and that was to stop the Auckland Central City
and other big communities losing their firefighters for day
shifts and weekends, where stations were being shut down.
That new relief roster did the trick.
It meant that the trucks were online, and the stations were open.
There were sufficient firefighters to keep them staffed.
In the last 12 months, FENZ has now claimed
that that additional roster was not
authorized. So they're now reducing the firefighters.
That was another 44 firefighters. They're now reducing them down.
This is a serious indictment of
what FENZ is thinking and where it's
heading. In addition, one of the most pressing situations that we
have with them is that they're looking at reducing call-outs.
Call-outs are where a career crew is out
undertaking emergency response, medical response, et cetera.
We'll use Masterton, for example, in that.
And they could be well away for an hour, an hour and a half, depending how far they
go out to do that. While they're away,
there's a call that goes out for people to come back and staff that station so that
they are there in order to respond should another call come through.
Across the country, there's five stations that really heavily rely
on that. The reason they rely heavily on that is because there's not enough
firefighters, and we're not staffing the appliances or the special appliances or,
one of you had a question before about ghost manning, essentially.
So it costs, it's 1.8 million that's really
low-hanging fruit for them, and they think that that's a suitable attack
on response. That they wouldn't need to call people back, which is
ridiculous. And that's alongside a whole lot of wastage, and
I just want to give a couple examples of the wastage.
One of the things that FENZ supposedly focuses on is
improving the culture within FENZ, and there's been about four to
five serious external and internal type
reviews of the culture.
They created what was called a behavior and conduct office.
It cost them $5 million to set that up.
They spent a million dollars in addition to that on
professional fees and consultants.
They paid out 400,000 through that
office in settlements to people for various
reasons. Then they went from there to Speak Safe.
I haven't got the figures on what Speak Safe had cost.
There was a recent review into a particular...
Sorry, in 2019, there was a Coral Shaw review that
basically found FENZ had no systems to manage complaints and
investigations properly. Last year, the Public Service Commission
undertook another review into a specific case.
FENZ spent a million dollars in that case
alone, and part of that expenditure was to ensure,
fighting for, to keep the names of those that had
been
involved in that case from their names being
disclosed. The victim
had her name disclosed because she agreed.
That's just an example of where the focus in the funding is.
That is millions of dollars, and I've listed for you other millions of wastage,
dollars in uniform, payroll systems, all sorts of things.
So we believe that we need a real, full, robust inquiry.
It has to be something along the lines where FENZ can be forced to
actually open the books and provide the information.
You've seen yourselves, it's like fighting jelly to get to the
bottom of some fundamental issues.
Thank you.Anything else you want to add,
Joseph?
Yeah. I'd just like to add a couple of really quick points.
In the beginning, so to start off, the fleet issues that
we're having with FENZ, I absolutely believe FENZ fleet is
mismanaged. I also believe that it's a symptom of a
larger problem of mismanagement across the organization that we're seeing, not
just in fleet but in the area that I'm working at the moment, operation training,
through the de-operationalization of our training function.
Training is fundamental and foundational to the
operational response that we conduct in our communities every single day.
I work as one of the operational people within training, but there
are very few operational people above me who I can speak to about
increasing training and ensuring that training is reflective of what we
have to do every day. So I want to tautoko Wally's
sentiments. They are the NZPFU sentiments on a more fulsome
investigation into Fire and Emergency New Zealand management.
Okay, so we've got some questions now.
We've got one from Mike to start with.
Thank you. Do I get two?
Yeah, go for it.
Thank you.
We've got time, so.
Just a couple of questions. I guess,
thanks for the submission to us. Really good.
And in there, you talk about the fact that
the same person holds both the CE and National Commander-
Yeah
... role. And I guess, probably an issue, how much of a risk is it?
Do you see it as quite a significant risk?
Yeah, I think it's a... Firstly, there was no transparent process for that
to occur.
For the most obvious risk to us, from our perspective, is that the
board really is really hearing from one person.
They're hearing from one person as the CE, and they're hearing from one person as
the National Commander.
And that has, I think,
limited
not only the information but the way it's been presented.
I think there's been a complete lack of operational lens-
Thank you
... on decisions.
Sorry, can you just expand on that?
Because if I compare it to police, there's one commissioner, defense force has one
chief of defense.
Most organizations have one chief executive that will report to a board or a
minister. What is the unique risk, do you think, with FENZ having one form
of contact? Because that doesn't actually strike me as being
the issue here.
Well, I think it's the issue in that the way the decisions have been made
and signed off at board level.
Even though the current CE National
Commander was a firefighter, there just appears to be a
whole lack of operational lens or drive into that
decision-making. And
they've got a very regimented decision-making
process, and if someone is completely wedded to what
they want to achieve, it's very difficult to get any other view from the board.
So I'm not disputing the issues, and particularly we've seen that with the board in
recent times. I note there's obviously a change there, which is good.
But
it's not having the structure which is typical across every government
agency. That's not the issue, is it?
It's
your view that it's the way that they have made decisions rather than the fact
that there is one single commander.
Well, I think the fact that there is the one and the same person and how that
occurred, because that wasn't the intention,
is an issue, and it's just an example of the lack of transparency.
And then, yes, and how it's played out with the current personnel.
Sorry, no.
Thank you. So Mike's got another question.
So FENZ has been here since 2017, and we've kind of
seen, look, we look at the fleet, it's got worse over time, not better.
So
why are we here today? What is actually driving this issue?
I
just think that there is a...
FENZ was
completely focused, I think, on rural originally, and a lot of the
funding went that way. I wasn't there
right at the start, but I've seen a complete lack of
a proper operational strategy that everything you're doing is in order
to protect the community, ultimately.
To get those big trucks, whether they're volunteer or career, out the door to
do their job. And there's been so much else that they have
focused on, and it's the decision-making process, I think, and it's just
a lack of
real concern, I think, not only about protecting the community but the safety of
those responding. We had a meeting a couple of weeks ago with the
hierarchy, not the board, and
we spoke at length about our real concerns.
This job is far more dangerous for firefighters today than I think it was a decade
ago.
Mm.
And it doesn't seem to resonate.
Great. Thank you. Tim.
Thanks, both, for giving us your time.
And
while we've got a little bit more time with you guys, because we wanted to make use
of time for you, but I wonder if we can drill into a couple of details.
I take the big picture point-
Yep
... which is about the spending, and if we didn't spend 600 million on paper holes,
then we could go and buy another 60 trucks, and that would be great.
It would update the relief fleet, which I think was a point that was well made by
the FBA.
Can I drill into a couple of details, Joseph, to help the committee
understand, how does this work on a station?
We've had reports and
submissions that say everything's done on paper still.
Are there logbooks kept for each vehicle?
When I was flying in the Air Force, you'd
sign out the logbook, but it would have a record, but that would all be updated in
a computer system, which would keep you, you'd know which components were going to
time out, whether it was hours or, in this case, kilometers or just
time of life. How does it work? What's it like for the guys on the station?
Non-gender specific guys, you know what I mean.
Mm-hmm.
What's it like for the team? Are
we up to speed? Do we know exactly what vehicles are where and what condition
they're in and what's coming up and what's due? Can you help us understand? Yeah.
To answer the question succinctly, Tim, no.
No, they don't know what's going on with the vehicles.
As I said during my introduction, I'm an accident investigator, and I've
investigated a number of fleet-based accidents that are either near
misses or were serious accidents.
And one of the recommendations that has come through the
Consistently through all of those accident investigations is that we need
an information system that keeps us up to date with the
current state of our fleet. That needs to be connected to those firefighters on
the stations that use those trucks every day, our service providers who are
expected to fix the issues that we raise, and the fleet managers
who work out of each of the regions within Fire and Emergency New Zealand.
Okay. So for the example that Kurt from Newtown gave us-
Yep
... an air leak on an appliance, I think it was a type four or
five, I can't remember.
Three. Apologies, it was Type Three.
How would that be recorded?
So an air leak on appliance, there's a paper-based book-
Yes
... where we'd write air leak on the appliance.
The next time that appliance went into the service provider, they would take the
book out, they would have a look at it, and they'd tick it if they'd done anything
about it. The firefighters on station wouldn't get any feedback as to what was
done. There's no report provided as to the fixes that were
made, any testing that's undertaken afterwards.
It's just ticked, that's fixed, and sent back to the fire station.
But what if you had a generation of Type Threes and this was starting to pop
up on multiple, something tracking that to go, "Hey,
the Scania Type Three has an air leak issue.
The Man Tranche One has a cracking issue." Because stuff's going to
happen, right?
Yep.
I get it. It'll go wrong. That's fine, but can we track at a systemic level
what's going on-
No
... and therefore-
No, we can't
... replacement likely. There's some appliances we
might be able to extend beyond the 20-year average we expect, and that's great if
they are functional. There's
just-
No, there's-
Make a paper note and that's it
... there's nothing consistent and systemic across Fire and Emergency New Zealand.
Within each of the brigades, the firefighters themselves have set up
Excel spreadsheets and other databases that they use to track their appliance.
I was in Kurt's position. I was an officer on Christine.
When Christine started to fail originally, we had a little Excel
spreadsheet that we set up
to watch the failures that we were having with that particular appliance,
and we would share it amongst ourselves.
So we knew what had been done, which service providers had touched it, and
what potential fixes were put in place.
But that's not systemic across the organization.
So the final part then, Chair, if I can.
Yeah, final part.
You get a relief appliance. I've been on a station as the relief for getting
something in and out, so relief appliance turns up.
There'll be some different things there.
Obviously, you have to transfer equipment over.
Yes.
They might stow the lockers slightly differently.
It might be a slightly different configuration truck.
Does that come with something that will give them a record of, hey, this
one has potentially an air leak, this one has a...
What are they getting in their relief trucks?
Nothing. They get nothing. Hopefully, the relief appliance comes from within the
district or the brigade.
Yes.
And that way we know its history anecdotally because we've seen that relief
appliance move from station to station. For larger brigades, you can do that.
I work out of the Christchurch brigade, so we have seven career stations in
Christchurch. We know which of the relief appliances are ours, and we watch them
shift from station to station. We know what's wrong with those trucks and when
they're off the run and when they're on the run.
But that's just because we know it, we see it.
If we got a truck from a different district, we would have no idea what its history
is.
So that speaks to the sort of the system issue that the UFBA was speaking about
before, right? It's not just at the acquisition, but it's this
broader system approach.
Yeah, absolutely.
Okay. Lamona, and then Andy.
Thanks, Madam Chair. I want to pivot my questions in terms of
the training,
because it will obviously affect the reduction in call-outs,
what we commented on earlier. And also, Kurt mentioned, you
mentioned in terms of it's a systemic, it's a broader pattern.
So training is important in terms of both
professional
and the volunteer firefighters. And how is that ripple effect happening
now in terms of not having
enough training schools? I think we heard from FENS that-
Yeah, recruit. So, yeah
... it's been reduced. Yeah.
So traditionally, you'd have, for career firefighters,
four recruit courses a year. There was an agreement resulting from
the agreement in principle to increase the number of career firefighters go to six.
There was work done on how that could be implemented.
FENS has gone now from four to six to one.
We got no guarantee of another course this year.
So what that means is that
we
won't even tread water with career numbers
as people
go out of the service for whatever reason.
But it was certainly not keeping up with the need either, which Kurt talked a
little bit about, which is the ratio, the number of firefighters you need to keep
each spot on the truck. At the moment, FENS employs 4.5
firefighters for each seat on the truck.
The evidence showed that they needed to go up to
five, 5.1, and FENS has now completely refused to do
that and is now walking backwards on the improvements made.
Just a quick sup, Madam Chair.
Quick sup.
Quick sup. So six
to four to one.
Yeah.
And the effect of that. Will the one be maintained?
Have you got the assurance from FENS that the one will be maintained this year?
No, they just make decisions. They used to talk to us about it, they don't anymore.
They just make decisions on whether or not they're going to call for
recruits. Do you want to talk a bit more about that?
Yeah. So, the current course that's running at the moment started in April and will
finish at the end of June with a view to having those firefighters on
station in July. Normally, there would be another course starting in July that
would then supplement for September and so on and so forth. That's not happening.
There is no course in July, and we're having conversations about whether a
September course will go ahead. So it's not just the current implications of not
having enough firefighters on the ground.
The future flow on effect is tremendous for the courses that I run as
well. If we don't bring people into the system, when they get to the point in time
that they want to become station officers or senior station officers or commanders,
we don't have that pool of people to build from.
And that's not just career firefighters, it's volunteer firefighters, too.
Okay.
Thank you.
Last question from Andy.
Yeah, look, I just wanted to ask you about the condition of the fleet.
So you're recording all on paper, plus you've got your tablets, et cetera.
Clearly, none of that's going to FENS.
It isn't.
Is that correct? You told us they don't know what condition of the fleet it is.
No, they don't. If any of the regional
managers for fleet know what's going on, it's because they have conversations with
either the firefighters or the service providers.
There's no systemic record of those things happening.
So they've got no systemic record.
Are there any KPIs that they've got that you're aware of about what the state of
the fleet should look like?
Not that I'm aware of. I think if there are KPIs, they're generalist KPIs-
Yeah, okay
... about how many trucks we need to have.
And we've been told that they spend 20% of their capital budget
on IT.
Where's it going?
Because that's a pretty fundamental piece of-
Yeah
... thing that you should have recorded in your system, is the condition of your
key
tools.
Not into the trucks. I think there is potentially some of that IT budget
that's been spent on
mobility. So having an information system that sits on the truck
to allow us to navigate to incidents, when we go to
incidents, but that's only for the trucks that go to the most incidents.
Gosh, so you can do that on your phone.
GPS.
It's called GPS.
Yeah.
Okay.
Sort of GPS, but it's not-
It's not rocket science
... quite. No, it's 20th century technology-
Yeah
... in the 21st century, but we're just catching up now, and I think that's where a
big portion gets spent.
So are you catching up or not?
I set a hard stop, so
last one.
Are you catching up or not, both with IT
and with the fleet?
No, we're not. We're trying to replicate what we would've been able to do decades
ago.
Look, thank you very much. All of them have been super
useful to us this afternoon. Thank you for your participation.
We're going to be moving into private session now. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Thanks very much.